---
title: A Day in the Life
timestamp: 2005-06-05
status: published
---

_**Note:**_ The thoughts I have here are **my own perceptions** of the
Program Manager position at Microsoft, and are not, nor should they be
considered, the Gospel truth about the PM position or working at Microsoft in
general. This is what I have seen of how things work **within my particular
team**. Things vary greatly even between different teams within Microsoft. On
top of all of this, I have only been working at Microsoft for about two
months. I know very little of what I'm talking about, and am by no means an
expert, but lots of people have been bugging me for information, so I'm
writing down my thoughts. The perceptions and opinions stated here are subject
to change.

Since this post is quite long (it took me over two weeks to type it up... I need to start brushing up the old typing skills if I'm planning on participating in NaNoWriMo again this year!), I am putting some handy links here, sort of like a table of contents. Some of this stuff is pretty dry, but I always try to be thorough, so skip through the boring stuff if you want. Just because I wrote it doesn't mean you have to read it.

* The Program Manager Position
* Meetings
* Feature Crew Councils
* Spec Reviews/Critiques
* Bug Management
* Security and Threat Models
* Staying on Task
* Making Tough Calls
* Software for Business
* The Atmosphere
* And Another Thing...

##The Program Manager Position

As a PM, I own **features**. A feature is a specific functional piece of a
product. For example, the spell-checker in Word is a feature. When it was
designed, some PM wrote up a **Spec** that outlined the functionality, all the
UI associated with it (the red squiggly line for example) - including
screenshot mock-ups - and the scenarios in which it would be used. The spec
also outlined how the feature was supposed to work. The **developers** worked
off of that spec to implement the feature, and the **testers** worked off of
the spec to test it. Basically, the PM is responsible for designing a feature
and driving it to completion. This doesn't mean we get whips that we can use
on the developers and testers - they don't work for us. We're a team, each
member with different responsibilities. The PM is the principal customer
advocate. That means I have to think like a customer. Would the customer be
confused here? Would they make a mistake because this is misleading?

As you can see, it's also important that a PM be aware of what is going on in
other areas of the product. For example, my feature may be similar to another
feature that another PM is working on, with similar UI or something, and if I
live in a cave and am totally oblivious to the state of other features and the
product as a whole, then what I end up producing could... well... suck. This,
of course, means that PMs have lots of meetings.

Back to the top

##Meetings

Most days I have a meeting or two, or three, or... For the most part meetings
are informal, and usually they're pretty enjoyable. There's a lot of different
types of them too. For example, every week we have a Program Manager meeting,
which is all the CMS PMs and Gerhard, our Group Program Manager (GPM).
Sometimes we do status checks within the team and sometimes we have guest
presenters from other teams. These presenters are usually people that are
working on features similar or directly related to something we as a CMS team
are working on. Sometimes they're people from another product team (say,
Frontpage, or Word) and sometimes they're from completely different divisions
of Microsoft. For example, my first PM meeting we had [Ward
Cunningham](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ward_Cunningham) come speak to us
about [Wiki's](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki). Awesome!

Since I am working on features with developers and testers, we have meetings
to touch base with each other and see where we are. In Microsoft-speak, the
team implementing a feature is called a Feature Crew. A crew typically
consists of a PM, a tester or two, and as many developers as are working on
the feature. We have a weekly meeting called a Feature Crew Sync-up where we
all get together and give status updates. There is also a larger logical
grouping of feature crews that are working on features that target the same
type of customer. For example, the features I am working on will be used by an
IT Professional at a large organization, so my FC and another FC that's
working on a related feature make up the ITPro team. These groupings help keep
things organized and eliminate some overlap in development, since you're
working closely with people whose features are similar in scope to your own.

Finally, there are a couple of other types of meetings that warrant their own
sections.

##Feature Crew Councils

During the development phase, when features are actually being designed and
implemented by feature crews, Feature Crew Councils are held to get feedback
from managers. For example, at an FCC I was involved in, both Gerhard and
Nathan, the development lead, were present. We walked them through the
feature, including a demo that was running the actual code and UI. Then they
ask us questions and give us useful feedback. For example, they might be
confused by a piece of the UI. That doesn't necessarily mean that UI must
change, but it does mean it's worth taking a second look at the design and
making sure there's not a way to make it clearer to the user. Often the
meeting attendees will have suggestions as well - it's not like they say,
"This sucks. Fix it." They say things like, "I don't think the difference
between the source section and the destination section is made clear. When I
look at this page, I'm a little confused about what data is where on the page.
You might try reorganizing it to make it clearer." These suggestions and
feedback are very important as a supplement to usability testing and customer
feedback.

##Spec Reviews/Critiques

Spec writing is an iterative process, filled with drafts, reviews, and
critiques. The basic idea is that no one PM can make all the right design
decisions or see things from every angle. In order to get the best spec and
make sure that features are well-designed, a spec goes through a review
process. The review process consists of many different steps, but basically a
review and a critique are similar in their goals; they just happen at
different chronological points. Usually a review happens earlier when there
are a lot of unresolved issues or unclear sections in the spec. A critique
happens after the PM and tester feel that the spec is complete and has all of
its active issues (sections in the spec that require investigating, then get
resolved as the PM finds out the answers) resolved. There may be more than one
review and critique, depending on the feedback received and any issues that
get uncovered as part of the critique.

##Bug Management

Since I started at Microsoft, I have learned more about software bugs than I
really wanted to. I've learned about things like regression bugs, the so-
called "bug tail," etc. Needless to say, bugs are a normal part of software
development. No matter how perfect or talented your developers are, they're
going to make mistakes and introduce bugs in their code; but it doesn't stop
there. Sometimes features aren't speced very well, and devs make judgment
calls or assumptions when they're coding. These assumptions might be
incorrect, and the feature ends up not working in the way that the PM
intended. This is essentially a spec bug - something that was either omitted
or unclear in the spec which creates confusion further along in the process.

As a PM, it's my responsibility to make it as clear as possible how each and
every piece of my feature should behave. This is important not only to the
developer, who's actually writing the code, but also to the tester, who has to
compare the code to the spec and make sure the code is working the way the
spec says. Spec bugs are filed against PMs in the same way code bugs are filed
against devs and test case bugs are filed against testers. Everything is
centralized in a big bug tracking database, and we access that DB using an
internal tool called [Product
Studio](http://weblogs.asp.net/scottgu/archive/2004/11/03/251930.aspx).
Product Studio is a very powerful and simple to use tool that is specially
tailored for bug/issue tracking. It's extensible enough that many teams use it
in many different ways. I really wish we had it back when I worked [tech
support](http://ots.iit.edu/) at IIT, because it's easy to find things and set
up complex searches (and save those searches!). I monitor bugs just like I
check my email, and try to resolve them as fast as I can, taking their
relative priority into account.

A bug's priority is determined by the triage process. When a bug is opened, it
initially has no priority. At some point (usually soon after it is opened), it
is triaged by the appropriate parties and assigned an appropriate priority.
Depending on the type of bug and where in the development process we are, the
person or persons responsible for triage may change. Later in the process, a
larger triage team may be used to discuss and determine relative priorities of
all the bugs.

##Security and Threat Models

Contrary to what you might believe about Microsoft, software security is
incredibly important here, and something we take very seriously. One key piece
(though not the only piece) of security analysis that we use is a Threat Model
(they're talked about in-depth in [Writing Secure Code](http://www.amazon.com/
exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0735617228/qid=1117507290/sr=8-1/ref=pd_csp_1/102-4659
020-2036163?v=glance&s=books&n=507846), chapter 2). Every feature must have
threat model analysis done on it. As a PM, I am responsible for managing the
model, which includes generating a Data Flow Diagram (DFD) of the feature to
use in modeling the threats to the system. Generating the DFD can be tough,
since it requires a lot of in-depth info about the nuts and bolts of the
underlying code, so meeting with the devs to get that information is crucial.
After you have the DFD, the entire teams looks at the system and figure out
where an attacker could try to breach it. You categorize the threats and
establish a baseline threat value, which is a numeric average of various
categories. Anyway, the book does a much better job of explaining the threat
modeling process, so if you're really interested, take a look at it. Every
threat has a bug entered to track it and ensure that the threat is properly
mitigated.

##Staying on Task

Right now, I am managing three very different things. One is a feature that
we've already finished coding (for the most part); the other two are sort of
"fell through the cracks" issues - things that either we didn't have the
manpower or time earlier in the development process to get to, and so I'm
taking care of them. The most difficult thing about my responsibilities is the
huge need for multitasking. I'm only doing three major tasks - some PM's are
managing many more. Thankfully, I am figuring out ways to make my life easier
as I go along. A major piece of staying on task is my whiteboard. Every office
at Microsoft seems to have at least one, and sometimes many more, whiteboards
(something I alluded to in my [interview breakdown](/dailydose/Pages/Microsoft
ProgramManagerInterviewTheBreakdown.aspx)). Not only is the whiteboard useful
for jotting down notes or drawing diagrams during informal meetings in your
office, but it's also a great task manager. I know, I know, I could use
Outlook and OneNote and the lot (which I actually do), but there's sometimes
no substitute to a big white board filled with things you need to get done.
It's a constant reminder of how far behind in my duties I am, and it feels oh-
so-good when I can finally erase a task from the board.

I do use Outlook a lot, though, because Microsoft is extremely email-centric.
Plus, it handles all my meetings and scheduling so I don't go crazy trying to
remember things. OneNote is also great, since I have a Tablet PC. I don't use
it as much as some people, but it is kind of nice to have one central place
where I can store my notes from every meeting I go to. There are problems with
it though, mostly because I tend to write at an angle and that throws the
handwriting recognition off a lot.

Another thing that helps me stay on task is my weekly one-on-one (1:1) with
Jim, my manager. It's a status update, and he clues me into some bigger-
picture timeline stuff, so it helps me prioritize the things I'm working on to
be sure I do the most important stuff first. Staying on task is something that
is pretty tough. I've been told it gets easier with time, and I believe it,
because I'm already more effective in one day that I was my entire first
month, I think. At the same time, though, I am not sure I'll ever be able
juggle things as well as some of the other people on my team. Time will tell,
I suppose.

##Making Tough Calls

Anyone who's worked at Microsoft (especially interns) will tell you that it's
baptism by fire. From day three, I was being looked to to make major design
decisions, and frankly, I don't think I was ready. On top of that, Jim left
for a week's vacation about a month into my tenure, so I _really_ had to
figure things out while he was gone. It was a good experience, definitely, but
I made a lot of mistakes and I really feel like an idiot a lot of the time
because not only do _I_ have to live with the consequences of a bad decision,
but the other people on my team do too. I especially feel bad when a flawed
design has to be recoded just because I didn't take the extra four hours or so
to really think through the original design. I do not relish the look on a
dev's face when he finds out he has to ditch all his previous work and start
over. It's good motivation to do it right the first time, I guess, and I take
some comfort in the fact that in the end things will be better for the
customer, so making the design change, while difficult, is definitely the
right decision.

##Software for Business

One of the biggest adjustments for me since moving here has been the
differences in designing software aimed at the enterprise customer. I come
from a very "individual user" background, and making enterprise-grade software
is a different experience in many ways. Don't get me wrong - ultimately we try
to make software that the end-user, which is always a _person_, will succeed
with. But there's a big difference between my mother as a computer user and
Peter, a computer user at Initech (catch [the
reference](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0151804/)?. Much of Microsoft's
software is aimed squarely at the business market, and since I have never been
in the business users' shoes, it's often really tough for me to "put on the
user's hat," as they often say around here.

##The Atmosphere

The atmosphere at Microsoft is... well... hard to describe. It's relaxed and
frenetic at the same time, if you can imagine that. The people I work with are
always busy, and yet the office somehow maintains a coolness about it. Dress
code is very casual. I wear jeans and a T-shirt most days, and sometimes I
feel overdressed even in that. For my first month, I woke up around 8am
and tried to get in by around 9:15 or so, but lately I have been trying to
make it in earlier, around 8am. I just hate staying at the office so late, so
if I start a little earlier, I leave a little earlier. Not that anyone's
watching, of course. I could show up at 11am and leave at 1pm if I really
wanted or needed to. I'm sort of free to do as I please, but there are
expectations in terms of productivity, so it makes sense for me to be in the
office long enough to get my work done and not go crazy. Also, with as many
meetings as I have, I usually need to be in the office during the majority of
the day anyway. I have found that self-motivation is _**very**_ important at
Microsoft, and though I thought I had a decent amount of it, I am finding that
I might not have enough. See Staying on Task.

Oh, and contrary to what you may have heard, iPods are welcome. That said,
there is certainly an enthusiasm for Microsoft products, and mostly it's well
founded. There are some cool Microsoft applications and products. (I hear
[Magneto](http://www.microsoft.com/windowsmobile/5/default.mspx) [aka Windows
Mobile 5] is most excellent, but I haven't had a chance to check it out yet.
The new version of Office is
[swooby](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=swooby) though, that I
can vouch for. There's enthusiasm around any cool technology, whether it
comes from within or from our competitors
([Automator](http://www.apple.com/macosx/features/automator/) is something
that was brought up recently), and I think that's to be expected. We're a
bunch of technology geeks, and whether we're building it or someone else is,
if it's cool, we're going to crow about it. I have run into people who are
hell-bent against anything non-Microsoft, especially
[OpenOffice](http://www.openoffice.org/) and
[Linux](http://www.ubuntulinux.org/), but they're few in number. That's a good
thing, too, because I really don't much care for zealots, no matter what side
of the software fence they're on.

##And Another Thing...

Well... I could really go on and on, but as I said at the beginning, I have been
writing this off and on for over two weeks, so I figure I might as well just
go ahead and post it. Maybe I'll post Part II in the next few weeks. We're
transitioning to a very different stage of the development process, so I'm
going to be learning a lot of new stuff, and my responsibilities are going to
change over the next few weeks. Anyway, hopefully this will appease the
inquiring minds of my friends and family for a day or so.

